let's do low bus squat control speed up
Drive easy easy good any questions or
observations
yesan
yeah I'll tell you now I don't agree
with that my cue is to look straight
ahead now unfortunately O's in the UK
and I've only had one squat session with
him since he's been here so right now
I'll tell you I'm not going to change
that so something that you have to
understand with highle lifters is they
found a way that works for them and
making small changes can be very
ineffective immedi in the short term it
can make them go backwards immediately
so right now I've noticed you know as
we're queuing he's doing everything as
I'm as I'm saying it but then as it gets
heavier and heavier his subconscious
takes over and now he's doing what is
comfortable for him yes I'm aware of it
no I don't agree with it no I'm not
going to change it right now how will I
change it and when will I change it once
we achieve our first objective we then
go cool your eyes dropped as soon as you
came down here soon as you started
loading heavy weights how can that
negatively impact the shape of the squat
can it negatively impact yeah you're
doing it with your hand why don't you
say it out loud back round I wouldn't
say the backrounds necessarily okay but
yeah it does tip forward a little bit
more than it would if you were to look
up because the body follows the eyes
it's a proprioception thing now why
would someone want to look down in a
squat what's what's a logical
explanation for that there is one yeah
neutral spine is exactly why because
there is forward torso lean okay and
when the upper back and the entire spine
looks down and the head's looking up a
lot of people say that's you know
extension of the cervical spine that's
bad for the neck no it's not bad for the
neck there's no load you got one school
of thought that says train the spine in
whatever [__] shape that you like and
now we've got a position that's totally
unloaded and people are scared it's
unloaded okay and quite often that's not
the position he'll be in what that does
is it impacts the lower segments of his
spine so the cervical spine once we're
up here okay it'll increase the rigidity
of his thoracic spine okay so what
happens when people look down the body
follows the eyes and quite of of that's
where they fail so you can do that with
a neutral spine you can tip forward with
a neutral spine you get it it doesn't
necessarily have to round but this is
why I teach look straight ahead now that
was taught to me by my mentors Eric and
Eric dad actually taught me but Eric is
the one that squatted 482 kg at 140
kilos body weight best in the world and
his dad said there is one rule and that
is to look straight ahead because the
body follows the eyes when you look down
that's where you fail there's still
always going to be exceptions to that
rule and that's what I say it's not a
deal breaker if I thought it was going
to be detrimental to 's Performance I'd
stop him now and say back off we need to
change it immediately cuz it's going to
hurt you but that's not the case
control yes yes yes yes yes yes yes
[__] easy nice work let's bring it to
180 I'll give you some examples of how I
coach a lifter like olle to make these
changes so I observe how he did on his
top weight which I know is actually
submaximal because he did 300 kg the
other day so this is you know from a
coacher standpoint this is what I'm
looking for okay I'll take them to
weight that they respect without
breaking them and then I will say now
let's Implement some of the cues that I
wanted to change on the way up but I
can't risk that on the heavy weights
right so quite often when I take on an
elite lifter although I might think that
what they're doing is wrong I may not
change them initially so this is where
I'll do things like my favorite
accessory exercises a paused squat okay
where I'm teaching them I want you to be
in a certain position and spend time
there I'll tell you another thing about
really really strong lifters I wouldn't
just come in and say no you don't
qualify your eyes are down so what we're
going to do is Ditch all of your
long-term plans or your short-term plans
if you have a comp coming up don't worry
about that because I need to fix this
technique and therefore we go straight
to 180 Kil P squats and don't worry
about the heavy stuff that ain't going
to work olle has goals he needs to be
strong and he is very strong he's top 10
in the damn world this is what we do
this is how I coach someone like goe we
do our main exercise this is called the
top set backdown set method we do our
top set with your Technique now for the
accessories we reduce the loads and now
we work on correcting that postal
deviation that I know is going to help
him long term let's have a look at a low
bar pause squat what's the Quee that
we're going to work on look straight
ahead like a low bar should have four
torso lean all right and I'll tell you
something just because it should have
four torso lean doesn't mean we
intentionally do it okay so this is I
guess answering another question that
you may not have thought you had people
start they initiate a low bar squat with
a a hinge of a hip I do not the hinge of
a hip so so shoving your butt back in a
low bar squat tips your torso forward
double body weight do you want to shift
your torso forward maybe maybe not
triple body weight do you want to lean
your torso forward he's 100 kilos he was
going for 340 so that's 3.4 times body
weight do you want to shift that barbell
in front of your center of your Bas of
support no you don't you want to align
it with the center of the base of
support so this is how you initiate the
movement right so I don't want to teach
you all these beautiful things with you
know strong hip extensors and tipping
forward and all these things with a a
body weight squat or a double body
weight squat sorry to be rude but who
cares about a double body weight squat
when human potential allows us to do
triple and even more and to do triple
and even more you do not want
this not just a load on your back it's a
load that's shaking around on your back
you want Precision okay I want to guide
Center of mass in line with the center
of my base of support you do not do that
by going DK okay so let's have a look at
his torso position and how that cue of
looking straight ahead impacts the
bottom position of his squat two reps
please Ollie your big stud eyes up m
breath eyes up what a lovely looking
thing eyes
up alignment okay how does that look
look good it's aligned you know I don't
sit here measuring you know the bar
pathing line with his midfoot I can see
it that's not the level of coaching that
I'm going to be giving okay I can see it
and how did it feel for you to do that
okay you know for the light loads it
feels good for the heavy loads
instinctively he's not going to want to
do that so therefore I won't do back
back down work with those heavy loads I
want him to think with heavy loads I
don't want him to think do you get it
you can't think under heavy loads you
need to get into a state of mind I don't
know if he did it just then but he goes
crazy eyes when he gets very very very
heavy okay and and that's not the time
to go okay you know what I mean all
right so so now he can now he can think
and not you know use maximal aggression
and and heightened arousal to achieve
this submaximal load so this is where
the art of coaching comes in